The following data analysis was based on data sourced from a [Kaggle competition](https://www.kaggle.com/competitions/predict-west-nile-virus/overview). It is further visualized with key insights highlighted in a [Tableau presentation](https://public.tableau.com/app/profile/jack.didier/viz/ChicagoWestNileVirus/WestNileVirusinChicago).

Its key purpose is to show the prevalence of West Nile Virus in Chicago from the years 2007-2013 during the active mosquito months of May-October and the effects that weather and pesticides have on mosquito populations.
Data includes: 
1) weather - a NOAA dataset of all weather values in the two Chicago weather stations
2) traps - a CSV file of all the times a mosquito trap was checked, where it was, how many mosquitos were there, the mosquito species, and if WNV was found present
3) spray - coordinates and times where mosquito pesticides were sprayed.

The Python code attached (West Nile Virus in Chicago.ipynb) in this repository first uploads, cleans, and organizes the data. From there, the Haversine formula is used to assign a closest station to each trap for more accurate weather value pairing and individual station values are shown. The CodeSum column from weather (which includes multiple 2-character weather codes on the same line) is split up into individual columns that can be accessed and rolling averages are performed on all values for 1-14 days the explore the effect of weather on mosquito growth. Data is then visualized first on a map of Chicago showing trap locations, if they have logged WNV, and spray locations. The second map identifies the closest weather station to each trap. Next the data was tested for correlated values with very little evidence of correlation. Mosquito species data was then used to perform a regression against WNV prevalence showing a clear driver in Culex Pipien. A regression was then performed on rolling averages of weather patterns showing little effect in the first few days (with a higher coefficient on the constant than other values), but was found to be more consequential in later days. A line chart is then shown showing statistical significance for the 3 highest coefficient values for both mosquito population and West Nile Virus prevalence. Finally, new columns are added in the Mosquito dataframe to identify if a trap was within a certain time/distance proximity of a pesticide spray event and a regression is performed on these columns to show the efficacy of mosquito spraying.
